.. _projects:

Projects
========

Current Research and Experiments
--------------------------------

- Conversational UIs
- Deep Learning (AI)
- Gamefication and Reinforcement Learning (RL)
- Teaching K-12 Artificial Intelligence (AI) using Unity3D
- Various A/B Comparison and Contrast of MOOC course work

Past Performance (ABRIDGED)
---------------------------
*These are selected projects to demonstrate proof of performance in a variety of settings*

Clinical Trials Patient Recruitment via Electronic Health Record (EHR) Integration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- Client: Major EHR vendor
- POC:  
- Date of Completion:  2004 – 2008; 2010
ALS is a major EHR vendor with a dominant market position in both hospital and ambulatory settings.  ALS retained OA as its innovation and technology partner to explore how existing ALS products and networks could be leveraged for value added services in clinical trials. Over a multi-year innovation cycle, OA prototyped and then finally delivered a highly scalable reporting platform that allows ALS end users, typically medical groups, to query for a number of candidates that qualify for clinical trials based on various patient criteria using a real time web (RIA) approach.  This approach offered secondary uses such as comparative effectiveness research.  For example, capturing patient information at the point of care facilitated medical groups to compare the effectiveness of EHR data collection methods. 
1. Phase 1
- ALS selected OA as part of an agile cross functional innovation team to assess product visioning, stakeholder targeting and technology platform selection. OA provided cross disciplinary approaches to assess legacy platform risks and in parallel iterated prototypes and guided technology platform selection while still allowing diverse stakeholder input and refinement.  OA delivered: 1) logical architecture definition including enterprise data model addressing both require candidate data elements and query framework and 2) functional prototype, called Recruit Assist (RA), which implemented an EHR data warehouse specialized for clinical trials and data mart feeds from various EHR products.  ALS validated the prototype against 30 beta clients and received Phase 2 endorsement for scaling and commercialization.   OA methods used for the project included: 1) Interoperability Architecture (IA) and 2) Adaptive Semantics (AS). OA built functional prototype using Microsoft enterprise technologies such as: Microsoft SQL Server 2005 Enterprise, Microsoft ASP.NET using customized RIA frameworks and the .NET platform.
2. Phase 2
- OA extended Year 1 efforts by optimizing the user experience by focusing on top EHR product lines and creating uniform interface via web services atop a highly scalable infrastructure to extend ALS reach into other client installations.  In year 2, other ALS EHR product groups expressed interest in integrating.  OA delivered: 1) enhancements to RA architecture and implementation, 2) web service specification that offered a portable abstraction of RA’s data model and query framework to Year 2 EHR product clients and 3) production support during deployment scaling from 30 to 100 clients and requiring typical 100 GB or more clinical trials data per client.  OA cross disciplinary methods used for the project included: 1) Interoperability Architecture (IA), 2) Domain specific tools and 3) Adaptive Semantics (AS).
3. Phase 3
- ALS further engaged OA to evaluate re-purposing RA for use cases outside of clinical trials. As Obama’s administration passed relevant governance for American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) and HITECH, new compliance requirements such as meaningful use (MU) positioned RA architecture for a directive called “Stimulus Reporting”.  OA delivered: 1) enhancements to RA architecture targeted to MU criteria, 2) interoperability architecture advisement on: 1)  integration of controlled vocabularies such as: SNOMED CT, LOINC, and RxNorm, 2) terminology server selection and their role in exposing clinical terminologies, and 3) HL7 standards such as HL7 Health Quality Measures Framework (HQMF) or “eMeasures” for use in repurposing RA.  OA cross disciplinary methods used for the project included: 1) Interoperability Architecture (IA), and 2) Adaptive Semantics (AS).

Domain-Specific Tools (DSTs) for Informatics
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- Client: Major Medical Association
- POC:  
- Date of Completion:  2011
Client selected OA as its technology partner based on OA’s previous leadership role during the transition of SNOMED CT and related derivative products to the International Health Terminology Standards Organization (IHTSDO) as well as OA’s inculcation of CAP staff in the development process and semantic technology tools for SNOMED CT release processing.  As part of CAP’s obligation for multi-year support of SNOMED CT, it mandated several committee sponsored projects for informatics platform improvements.  These projects targeted user and business rules improvements to SNOMED CT authoring platform for various departments including: 1) the core SNOMED CT informatics team and 2) professional services handling use of SNOMED CT as a controlled vocabulary used for cross maps in the field.  OA continues to lead CAP interoperability projects requiring various levels of cross disciplinary focus.  Below are relevant works to AF121-050 with regards to DSTs, controlled vocabularies, rules engine, lexical processing and semantic architecture and simplified to Phases 1, 2 and 3.
1. Phase 1
- OA collaborated with the Client core innovation team responsible for enhancing a strategic internal DST specialized for authoring medical controlled vocabularies and ontologies called Apelon Terminology Development Environment (TDE).  As SNOMED CT has over 400 K concepts and 4 M relationships and requires 40 minutes to classify on a modeler workstation, the default TDE platform required several improvements in work flow, quality and business rules automation in order for CAP to scale effort to satisfy contractual support agreements. 
- OA delivered: 1) logical architecture definition for TDE enhancements and implementation recommendations using Spring framework and Oracle 10g modules as core extension approaches, 2) TDE QA enhancements including automation of business rules enforced at both client and server, 3) TDE server processing improvements leveraging Oracle optimizations for recursive queries and 4) mentoring CAP staff on approach and technologies.
- OA delivered enhancements using Java enterprise technologies such as:  JBoss Drools, Spring Framework, Oracle 10g, Eclipse, MyEclipseIDE, and Java JRE/SDK 1.5.  OA cross disciplinary methods used for the project included: 1) Interoperability Architecture (IA), 2) Domain specific tools and 3) Adaptive Semantics (AS).
2. Phase 2
- OA continued to lead Client innovation projects with deeper focus on enhancing informatics tools to target the broader Health Information Technology (HIT) market targeted for client facing projects in broader HIT market focus on improving DSTs for creating: 1) cross maps and 2) extensions.  Cross maps are mappings between knowledge bases (e.g., ICD-9 CM to SNOMED CT).  Extensions are local extensions to existing knowledge bases for client or use case specific uses (e.g., U.S Drug Extension based on SNOMED CT).  CAP required more automation in cross map and extension production due to the extensive manual and domain expert time required to perform human mappings and approve a targeted innovation project called Automated Mapping Enhancements (AME).  AME architecture challenges included: 1) batch processing of non-normalized source text to normalized entities and concepts, 2) basic human supervised machine learning  (i.e., “mapping memory”), 3) import and export of various semantic distribution formats and 4) custom user interface and interaction improvement of DTS editor based on user tasks analysis.  AME resulted in a set of extensions to an open source informatics tool called Apelon Distributed Terminology Server (DTS) which provides automation support for batch mapping and lexical analysis called “mapping memory”. 
- OA delivered: 1) stakeholder facilitation and visioning,  2) logical architecture definition and DTS enhancements for AME, 3) modeler training on AME functionality and features, 4) the migration of AME to agile development environments and 5) product support for AME.  
- OA delivered enhancements using Java enterprise technologies such as:  Spring Framework, Oracle 11g, Eclipse, Maven 2.x, Apache Lucene, Java Swing, JForm Designer, Junit, Jenkins CI server, and Java JRE/SDK 1.6.  OA cross disciplinary methods used for the project included: 1) Interoperability Architecture (IA), 2) Domain specific tools and 3) Adaptive Semantics (AS).  IA related tools involve Apelon DTS data model, Apelon Ontylog description logic distribution format and NLM Specialist lexicon.
3. Phase 3
- OA continued to lead Client innovation projects with deeper focus on semantic interoperability issues between EHR and LIS systems.  Due to success in Phase 2, CAP engaged OA to explore how to re-use and extend the Apelon DTS plus AME extensions projects for specific use in laboratory domain mapping.  A key architecture challenge was that DTS did not support other knowledge bases (i.e., it was originally designed for SNOMED CT) in public open source version, and it required custom extensions. 
- OA delivered: 1) stakeholder facilitation and visioning, 2) user research and analysis of how modelers preferred to map laboratory content and 3) logical architecture definition for DTS enhancements on how to load laboratory domain knowledge bases such as LOINC.
- OA delivered enhancements using Phase 1 and 2 technologies plus Java enterprise technologies such as:  Spring Framework, Oracle 11g, Eclipse, Maven 2.x, Regenstrief RELMA and LOINC distribution formats, and Java JRE/SDK 1.6.  OA cross disciplinary methods used for the project included: 1) Interoperability Architecture (IA), 2) Domain specific tools and 3) Adaptive Semantics (AS).  IA related tools involve Apelon DTS data model, Apelon Ontylog description logic distribution format and NLM Specialist lexicon.

Rare Disease Registries – Use of Metadata and Terminology Standards to Support Retrieval and Re-Use of Question-and-Answer Sets for Patient Registries
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
- Client: Major Academic Research Institution
- POC:  
- Date of Completion:  October  2011
Patient registries are a key component in medical research and personalized healthcare.  Client engaged OA as a technology partner for NLM funded research focused on rare disease patient registries.  Rare disease registries post interesting problems for researchers.  One core issue is that rare disease researchers are often isolated and are not even aware of each other’s research.  Unlike research institutions with abundant resources (e.g., NCI cancer research), this audience does not have a large infrastructure (e.g., caBIG grid) or standardized questionnaires and instruments at their disposal.  USF’s patient reported item specifications and metadata for rare diseases (PRISM) project was a step towards improving this by consolidating rare disease data elements into a publicly available distribution that emphasized standard question and answer sets to ease rare disease researchers’ tasks in creating their own registries.  A key differentiator for the PRISM approach was its hybrid structure, combining: 1) a traditional healthcare informatics approach of controlled vocabularies and coding systems (i.e., SNOMED CT) to encode question and answer sets and 2) a more modern Health 2.0 approach using semantic web style meta data vocabularies such as Dublin Core (DC).  Lastly, PRISM represents a shift toward the Health 2.0 trend of “bottom up”, a collaborative and community based building of knowledge as opposed to a centralized or single sourced approach.
1. Year 1 
- Client selected OA as part of a small and focused cross functional research team tasked with creation and curation of prioritized rare disease content required for demonstrating how target rare disease research would browse, search and consume registry items (i.e., questions and answer sets).  OA was engaged based on expertise in cancer protocol tooling solving similar issues for item design requiring encoding using controlled vocabulary such as SNOMED CT.  Specifically, OA had expertise with a proprietary DST called the template editor (TE).  Architecture challenges included retrofitting previous use of the TE for cancer approaches and repurposing for rare disease domain and addressing how Web 2.0 and semantic web (Web 3.0) concerns could be met by using DC to capture controlled vocabulary codes and descriptions and facilitating a distribution format that facilitated various styles of search including: 1) text matching, 2) controlled vocabulary matching via terms and 3) concept matching.
- OA delivered: 1) user research and analysis, 2) logical architecture definition including separation of data elements and controlled vocabulary bindings, 3) a functional prototype to be used across several rare disease content types (e.g., Vasculities) and 4) indexing and data models.  OA delivered DST artifacts using enabling technologies such as:  Prototyping (Microsoft Expression Blend), Web (ASP.NET, IIS 7.0; Windows 2008 Server R2; Sencha ExtJs 4.0), Hudson CI server, Subversion (SVN), Microsoft SQL Server 2008 R2, and Microsoft .NET 4.0 Framework.  OA cross disciplinary methods used for the project included: 1) Interoperability Architecture (IA) and 2) Adaptive Semantics (AS). 
2. Year 2
- OA continued its leadership role on the PRISM team by extending its year 1 success and augmenting Client modeling, curation and semantic modeling to facilitate its launch of PRISM as a publicly available offering.  As part of authoring, curation and distribution, rare disease item information improvements in DSTs and data transformations were required.  Research and architectural challenges included how to model transformation such that both human and machine readable semantic web formats could be possible for future phases.   
- OA delivered: 1) logical architecture definition and recommendations on how to extend TE, related data models and transformations to comply with USF PRISM requirements, 2) USF training on related data models and approaches, 2) TE extensions to support other controlled vocabularies such as LOIN, RxNorm and 3) category, synonym and indexing generation enhancements to distribution format.  OA delivered DST artifacts using Phase 1 enabling technologies plus:  DC, RDF, RDFS, SKOS and TopQuadrant Topbraid Maestro.  OA cross disciplinary methods used for the project included: 1) Interoperability Architecture (IA) and 2) Adaptive Semantics (AS).